>> Jem Young: Now we're
moving onto databases and
this is the final portion of the course.
Last two sections, so you're all good,
you made it, you've got a modern website
running like a fine tuned website.
Yeah, it's doing well right now.
So let's talk about databases.
As one of my favorite professors
in college once said, as your job,
mostly what it boils down to is
writing something into a database and
getting something back.
And when you think about web applications,
that's almost all exactly
what you're doing.
You're putting stuff in and
you're taking stuff out, that's it.
You may do some data lunging on the side
like parse it, do whatever you want.
But at the core you're putting
something in the database,
you're getting something out, that's it.
That's why I'm putting this section about
databases as part of full stack because at
some point you're gonna have to
run a database for something.
So the two types of databases that we
mainly need to concern ourselves about
are relational and
non-relational databases.
Now, someone tell me the difference
between a relational and non-relational.
>> Speaker 2: Schemeless versus documents,
or table versus documents.
>> Jem Young: That's exactly right.
Schemeless versus documents,
or table versus documents.
Essentially a relational database
means the data relates to
other data in some way.
So you can index these things much easier,
you run SQL on relational databases.
Non-relational database,
it's better to think of it as
a document store key value store.
You can put in any sort of data you want,
you don't have to format it,
you can just dump it into
the database as fast as possible.
Some examples of non-relational database
Redis which is a key value store,
it's very very fast.
Cassandra, Mongo DB is
a very popular one for
document store they just had an IPO
doing pretty well so I hear.
Relational database you probably
heard cuz that's the one running SQL,
Structured Query Language.
MySQL, Postgre, SQL Server very
popular servers, very popular language
because before, if you think about
the days before SQL, you have data.
How do you get it back out?
And it's a hard problem,
it's a hard problem.
Yes, where I have data that I wanna
store,, what format do I put it in?
I can't just dump it in there, I have
to have some sort of structure to it.
And that's where the structure
query language comes in.
The down side of that is,
that I have to formulate my data in a very
specific way to fit into my database.
So you have SQL and
you have to process all these things
versus something like Redis
which is just a key value store.
Doesn't care about the structure,
you've put it in with the key and
you've put it in with the value, whatever
you want to be, and it's just fast.
The difference is SQL tends to be a little
bit faster if you querying thing.
So if I wanna say, how many users are
logged into frontendmasters.com right now,
I use SQL for that.
Because I can make a query that give me
that exact data versus a non-relational
database.
I'd have to parse all this data,
extract it out, modify that,
I'd essentially have to map reduce.
I'd have to map that data reduce
it down to the value that I want.
That's the difference between
a relational and non-relational database.
So before everybody wants to be like, I
wanNA use couch DB or I wanna use Mongo or
I wanna use all of these things
which are heap and cool and
fast understand what kind
of data you're gonna store.
How's the data gonna look in the future?
And how fast do you want it to be?
Non-relational data tends to
be much faster for inserting,
because there's no schema,
you don't have to process any data.
You just throw it in there, essentially
get a bucket and throw it in there.
It's a bit more complicated than that, but
that's a good way of thinking about it.
And then getting data
out is very fast too.
And everyone's like use Mongo,
use Redis, but if you wanna
actually run analytics of some sort,
eventually you wanna infer user behavior.
You wanna understand what's happening
at the core structural query
language is probably the way they go.
Make sense, any questions on database?
That was a lot, I got,
been very generous on it.
Yes.
>> Speaker 3: Is Firebase
considered database?
>> Jem Young: Firebase is,
I believe it is an API, API as a service.
I'm not that familiar with it, but
I believe it's a way of setting up API's
on their server and
having it return things.
Does that help?
Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: It has a NoSQL
database part of it.
>> Jem Young: Okay.
>> Speaker 4: It's like proprietary.
>> Jem Young: Okay so
it does have a database built into it.
That's pretty cool,
they got bought by Facebook, right?
I don't actually remember, Google?
Okay, yeah I've seen some Firebase
examples on Google sites.
But that at a very, very,
very high level is databases.
Now I say very high level because there
are entire fields of computer science that
just have their databases.
Their entire career is that
all you do is database
administration because
it's very very hard.
If you're at that level,
you probably wouldn't be in this class.
Or maybe it's forgetting,
so congratulations,
you're off on a wonderful journey.
But essentially when you're trying to pick
is you're starting a brand new server,
you're trying to pick
the type of database,
keep these things in mind about
relational versus non-relational.
Cuz it's really tempting to use
a non-relational database cuz
it takes less work, less queries to get
it in, but you may pay for that later on.